---
title: Untitled
date: 2016-12-31 12:29:53 -0500
---

I believe one of the main reasons I didn't write as much as I wanted to in 2016 is because I put too many constraints on myself and my writing.
I set expectations too high and put too many barriers in may way.
As a result, I didn't make anything.
I find that very disappointing.

Instead, I'm going to remove as many constraints on my writing as I can.
I hope it'll let me make more things and maybe some of those things may even be good, despite the lack of constraints. 
I also hope that in just _doing the work_ that I may naturally find a few constraints that matter and are helpful. 

But in the meantime, I want to be sloppier.
More importantly, I need to practice giving myself the permission to be sloppier.
I need to become comfortable with neatness not being everything.
Not only does this matter for myself, but for the kind of work I'll be taking on in the next year.
Neatness needs to free up some space for other values.
Neatness will still count, because it's something I still value highly, but completion will count more and ultimately be worth more.

For example: I found a title to be overly constraining in the last entry I wrote and as a result I picked a bad title.
So I'm giving myself permission to leave this entry untitled, to prove to myself both that I can do it and that everything will be just fine if I do.
Also, in this particular situation, it actually seems like a pretty apt title.

What other constraints did I put on myself?
I think a pressure to be overly interesting or make sure that an entry was worth somebody else's time.
I was wrong about that.
This only needs to be worth **my** time and in order to be worth my time it has to help me.
Externalizing my thoughts in a way that's both semi-private by virtue of obscurity and inscrutability, i.e. not tweets, seems very worth my time.
The best part is I don't have to justify it to anybody but myself.

I think what I've learned is that while constraints are something extraordinarily helpful when doing design, design isn't everything that I do.
As helpful as constraints are to a design process, they can be as unhelpful to other processes, in an equal-but-opposite kind of way.

Oh!
Also I stopped myself from writing more than once a day.
That was a super stupid constraint.
I'm not gonna let that stop me anymore, for sure.